AIDA-665 (#137)
NextCenturyCorporation/AIDA-Interchange-Format: src/main/resources/com/ncc/aif/ontologies/README.md

# AIDA Ontologies

The following is a listing of the ontologies found at AIDA-Interchange-Format/src/main/resources/com/ncc/aif/ontologies.

> Each ontology will contain a short description of what they are built from, what they are used for,

Reviewer: I think you meant "Each section in this README contains..."

and any other points of relevant information that might be of some use to individuals using these files.

## Differences Between *Ontology and *OwlOntology Files

Some ontologies have a corresponding file with a similar name such as SeedlingOntology and SeedlingOwlOntology. In these

> cases, the *OwlOntology files signifies that the rdf file is compatible with strict OWL, in particular using the correct syntax

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
cases, the *OwlOntology file uses strict OWL and won't include third-party properties/classes 
```

> in lieu of *Ontology file properties like schema:rangeIncludes. The *Ontology files are not restricted and can make use of third-party properties to simplify definitions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
like schema:rangeIncludes. The *Ontology files are not restricted and make use of third-party properties/classes to simplify definitions.
```

Both the *OwlOntology and *Ontology files define the same vocabulary.

> # Common Ontology Files

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# AIF Ontology Files
```

## AidaDomainOntologiesCommon

A collection of top level classes all Domain Ontologies reference.  Additionally, there are
also a few universal classes that include important properties such as the CanHaveNumericValue class.  This ontology is
a hand-written source file and is not generated.

## InterchangeOntology

This ontology contains the Interchange vocabulary and is written in strict OWL. In particular, it contains
the OWL definitions for domain and range which describe how each property interacts with defined classes.

# LDC Ontology Files

This Domain Ontology was provided by LDC as an evolution of the SeedlingOntology and SeedlingOwlOntology and will be used for the M18 evaluation.

- LDCOntology
- LDCOwlOntology

# Seedling Ontology Files

> This Domain Ontology created from the first cut of data from LDC and was primarily used by performers during the M9 evaluation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This Domain Ontology was created from the first cut of data from LDC and was primarily used by performers during the M9 evaluation.
```

Ideally, this will become a legacy ontology replaced by LDCOntology and LDCOwlOntology, but until we completely remove data from pre-M9, these
Ontology files will remain for performers to use.

- SeedlingOntology
- SeedlingOwlOntology

# Program-Wide Ontology Files

> The Entities, Events, and Relations ontologies contain the vocabulary that will be used for definning messages post-M18 evaluation.

Reviewer: MIsspelled "defining"

## EntityOntology

A collection of Entity classes determined by the AIDA Ontology Working Group. The term 'Entity' refers to
a physical being or intangible concept that either interacts or is subject to interaction.

## EventOntology

A collection of Event classes determined by the AIDA Ontology Working Group. The term 'Event' refers to
something that occurs when two or more Entities interact in some way.  Some examples being building weaponry, signing a
treaty, and the moving of people from one place to another.

## RelationOntology

A collection of Relation Type classes determined by the AIDA Ontology Working Group. The term 'Relation' refers to

> A connection between two or more Entities. This includes such things as the material used to create

Reviewer: The first letter of this line "A" should be "a"

# AIDA Ontologies

The following is a listing of the ontologies found at AIDA-Interchange-Format/src/main/resources/com/ncc/aif/ontologies.
Each section in this README contains a short description of what they are built from, what they are used for,
and any other points of relevant information that might be of some use to individuals using these files.

## Differences Between *Ontology and *OwlOntology Files

Some ontologies have a corresponding file with a similar name such as SeedlingOntology and SeedlingOwlOntology. In these
cases, the *OwlOntology file uses strict OWL and won't include third-party properties/classes
like schema:rangeIncludes. The *Ontology files are not restricted and make use of third-party properties/classes to simplify definitions.
Both the *OwlOntology and *Ontology files define the same vocabulary.

# AIF Ontology Files

### AidaDomainOntologiesCommon

A collection of top level classes all Domain Ontologies reference.  Additionally, there are
also a few universal classes that include important properties such as the CanHaveNumericValue class.  This ontology is
a hand-written source file and is not generated.

### InterchangeOntology

> This ontology contains the Interchange vocabulary and is written in strict OWL. In particular, it contains

Reviewer: After discussion with @jakevb, I think I understand where I was confused.  I recommend changing the entire sentence starting from "In particular..." to the following.

It defines the structure of the vocabulary, including the hierarchy of terms (via the "domain" schema definition) and the possible datatypes of terms (via the "range" schema definition).

@ecurley-nextcentury - do you agree with the rewording of this?

Reviewer 2: All RDF is represented as triples (**subject**, **predicate**, **object**). "Domain" refers to what types a particular **predicate** can have as **subject** and "range" refers to what types that **predicate** can have as **object**. If these terms are confusing things, we should just remove them. We can probably change the description to something like, "This ontology defines the Interchange vocabulary and how the defined classes and properties may interact". I'll leave it to you and Jake to come up with something that works. Let me know if you have any questions.

Reviewer: Your recommendation is good with me.

Author: Sounds good.  I incorporated Eddie's suggested change.

> # AIF Ontologies

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# AIDA Ontologies
```

The following is a listing of the ontologies found at AIDA-Interchange-Format/src/main/resources/com/ncc/aif/ontologies.
Each ontology will contain a short description of what they are built from, what they are used for,
and any other points of relevent information that might be of some use to individuals using these files.

# Differences Between Ontology and OwlOntology

Some ontologies have a corresponding file with a similar name such as SeedlingOntology and SeedlingOwlOntology. In these
cases, the Owl ontology signifyies that the rdf file is compatible with strict owl, in particular using the correct syntax
for more complex properties of classes such as RangeIncludes. The non-Owl ontology uses a simpler structure for easier extraction
of important values.  Both the Owl and non-Owl ontology should define the same vocabulary.

## AidaDomainOntologiesCommon

> A collection of top level classes most other ontologies reference as the highest level class.  Additionally, there are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A collection of top level classes all Domain Ontologies reference.  Additionally, there are
```

> also a few universal classes that include important properties such as the CanHaveNumericValue class.  This ontology was

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
also a few universal classes that include important properties such as the CanHaveNumericValue class.  This ontology is a hand-written source file and is not generated.
```

> created by individually selecting those class values and not from any other source of data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

## EntityOntology

> A collection of Entity classes determined by the Ontology working group.  Entity referring to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A collection of Entity classes determined by the AIDA Ontology Working Group. The term 'Entity' refers to
```

> a physical being or intangible concept that either interacts or is subject to interaction.  This in combination with Events

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a physical being or intangible concept that either interacts or is subject to interaction.  This, in combination with Events
```

> and Relations ontologies contain the vocabulary that will be used for defining messages post-M18 evaluation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and Relations ontologies, contains the vocabulary that will be used for defining messages post-M18 evaluation.
```

> and Relations ontologies contain the vocabulary that will be used for defining messages post-M18 evaluation.

Reviewer: With the new organization that I recommended in the top-level comment for this PR, you can remove the starting with sentence "This in combination with" and replace it with a similar sentence in the main "Program-Wide Ontology Files" section. Like "The Entities, Events, and Relations ontologies contain..."

## EventOntology

> A collection of Event classes determined by the Ontology working group.  Event referring to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A collection of Event classes determined by the Ontology working group.  The term 'Event' refers to
```

> an experience that occurs when two or more Events interact in some way.  Some examples being building weaponry, signing a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
something that occurs when two or more Entities interact in some way.  Some examples being building weaponry, signing a
```

> an experience that occurs when two or more Events interact in some way.  Some examples being building weaponry, signing a

Reviewer: I think you mean "Entities interact in some way", not "Events interact".

> treaty, and the moving of people from one place to another. This in combination with Entity

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
treaty, and the moving of people from one place to another. This, in combination with Entity
```

> and Relations ontologies contain the vocabulary that will be used for defining messages post-M18 evaluation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and Relations ontologies, contains the vocabulary that will be used for defining messages post-M18 evaluation.
```

## InterchangeOntology

> The main purpose of this ontology is to contain the Interchange vocabulary and to be used by performers using strict OWL

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This ontology contains the Interchange vocabulary and is written in strict OWL. 
```

> The main purpose of this ontology is to contain the Interchange vocabulary and to be used by performers using strict OWL

Reviewer: I think "The main purpose of this ontology is to contain the Interchange vocabulary" is correct, but I'm not sure that the rest is correct.  Let's discuss to help me understand this statement, and the following sentence starting with "In particular".

> as reference to the classes and properties that are used in our not-strict OWL ontologies. In particular, it contains

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In particular, it contains
```

> the OWL definitions for domain and range which are usually omitted from the not-strict OWL ontologies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the OWL definitions for domain and range which describe how each property interacts with defined classes.
```

# LDCOntology

> The ontology was given by LDC as an evolution of the SeedlingOntology and will be used for the M18 evaluation.  This will eventually

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This Domain Ontology was given by LDC as an evolution of the SeedlingOntology and will be used for the M18 evaluation. 
```

> The ontology was given by LDC as an evolution of the SeedlingOntology and will be used for the M18 evaluation.  This will eventually

Reviewer: In the new structure that I recommended in the top-level comment of this PR, put this sentence in the main section".
Also change "given" to "provided"

> replace SeedlingOntology once the original LDC data has been removed from our programs and updated with the newest version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

> replace SeedlingOntology once the original LDC data has been removed from our programs and updated with the newest version.

Reviewer: "once the original seedling data"

## LDCOwlOntology

> The ontology was given by LDC as an evolution of the SeedlingOwlOntology and will be used for the M18 evaluation.  This will eventually

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This Domain Ontology was given by LDC as an evolution of the SeedlingOwlOntology and will be used for the M18 evaluation.
```

> replace SeedlingOwlOntology once the original LDC data has been removed from our programs and updated with the newest version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

## RelationOntology

> A collection of Relation Type classes determined by the Ontology working group.  Relations referring to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A collection of Relation Type classes determined by the Ontology Working Group. The term 'Relation' refers to
```

> A specification of the connection between two or more Entities. This includes such things as the material used to create

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a connection between two or more Entities. This includes such things as the material used to create
```

> a weapon, the nationality of an individual and the title an employee holds. This in combination with Entities

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a weapon, the nationality of an individual and the title an employee holds. This, in combination with Entities
```

> and Events ontologies contain the vocabulary that will be used for defining messages post-M18 evaluation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and Events ontologies, contains the vocabulary that will be used for defining messages post-M18 evaluation.
```

## SeedlingOntology

> The ontology created from the first cut of data from LDC and was primarily used by performers during the M9 evaluation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This Domain Ontology was created from the first cut of data from LDC and was primarily used by performers during the M9 evaluation.
```

Ideally, this will become a legacy ontology replaced by LDCOntology, but until we completely remove data from pre-M9, this
Ontology file will remain for performers to use.

## SeedlingOwlOntology

> The ontology created from the first cut of data from LDC and was primarily used by performers during the M9 evaluation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This Domain Ontology was created from the first cut of data from LDC and was primarily used by performers during the M9 evaluation.
```
